Good day I'm Norman Wildberger today we're going
to introduce a very important notion in the modern
analysis the idea of a limit and not surprisingly
we have a somewhat different take on limit than
in most treatments I think that even if you're
professional mathematician there may be something
in this video that's new for you so let's start
out by just an intuitive understanding here's
a sequence 1 1/2 1/4 1/8 1/16 we intuitively
feel that the numbers are getting smaller and
they are approaching in some sense zero so we
might say that the limit of the sequence looks
like it's tending towards zero here's another
sequence of terms getting smaller 1 1/2 1/3 1/4
1/5 approaching again 0 at least it looks like
it this is a different kind of situation where
we have numbers 0 and then 1/2 then 3/4 7/8
fifteen sixteenths now it appears as if the
numbers are approaching one so in each case it
appears that the sequence of numbers on the Left
approaches the number on the right if you keep
going of course there's some difficulties with
this because the left-hand side the sequences
are not really well defined just specifying a
few terms doesn't of course layout the full
sequence and more importantly the notion of
a sequence itself is highly problematic we have
not defined the notion of a general sequence like
we've been rather careful to restrict ourselves to
rather specific so-called on sequences associated
with polynomials or poly numbers and rational
functions or rational poly numbers in any case
the idea of becoming clear about what approaching
a limit means is a 19th century development and
I guess most of the credit goes to great French
mathematician Koshi who I guess asked the question
what does it exactly mean for a sequence to
approach a limit and the answer that he gave
that was further developed by others became a
cornerstone for modern analysis the notion of
a limit Koshi and then later Karl buyer Strasse
formalized the so called epsilon-delta definition
of a limit at least according to the usual story
and this is a rather technical formulation of what
it means for a sequence to approach a limit for
example the limit of the sequence s of n as n
approaches infinity equals a or alternatively
a slightly different context the limit of a
function f of X as X approaches a equals L so
in both of these cases the idea of what these
things mean was encoded in a certain logical
structure involving two arbitrary generally
small numbers epsilon and Delta so generally
refer to as the epsilon delta approach to limits
unfortunately this theory does not really
work okay there's serious logical gaps not
surprisingly with the current modern treatment
the epsilon delta treatment of limits even though
ironically this is perceived by the Academy
to be some kind of high point of rigor and
it's perceived to be a particularly insightful
and carefully laid-out definition but in fact
when you look more carefully you see that it is
not exactly so so most calculus texts are wrong
when it comes to the notion of limit in fact the
the notion of limits that's usually given is not
only problematic logically but it's also rather
difficult for students to first of all get their
heads around abstractly and secondly actually to
practically work with so the reality is that most
calculus students even at the university level are
only told about the epsilon-delta definition of a
limit but not actually seriously presented with
it it's deemed too hard for most undergraduates
to understand nevertheless although there
are things wrong with it the basic idea
nevertheless has merit there are underlying the
technicalities some very good solid ideas that can
be reformulated without too much work to make them
more solid and that's the kind of job that we're
interested in doing a course so at the risk of
sending you all scurrying in different directions
here is the official epsilon-delta definition for
the idea of the limit of a sequence let's have a
look at at least let's lay it out on the open
so we can at least get an initial orientation
to what this means but I warn you that this
is a difficult notion and rightly so because
there's actually some ambiguities logically in
it but we would like to at least get a sense of
what's going on with it all right so here's a
standard definition of the limit of a sequence
let's call the sequence s of N and I'm adopting
the usual calculus point of view to these things
where one doesn't actually need to define the
word sequence it's just bestowed upon us as
our birthright that we happen to know what that
word means all right so we have a sequence s of
N and is a natural number so we're thinking of s
of 1 s of 2 s of 3 and so on and what we want to
do is define this expression here what it means
for the limit as n approaches infinity of s of n
to be a where a is some fixed number what does
that mean so here's the definition essentially
going back to Koshien buyers drawers it means
that for every epsilon greater than zero there
is a natural number n capital n such that
okay such that this holds what is this this
is the implication that if little n is bigger
than or equal to capital n then the absolute
value between s of N and a in other words this
difference in absolute value is less than Epsilon
so it's no surprise that this is a very
intimidating definition okay do not be
worried if this sounds like a whole bunch
of gobbledygook if you have never seen it
before it's a difficult definition
and in fact we're not going to adopt
this definition so it's not going to be
too important for us that we completely
understand it but nevertheless I want to
give you an initial orientation to what it
means a picture so we're going to imagine
the sequence s of n laid out in this way
this is recording the sequence here is the
value s of 1 above the x-axis so in this case
s of 1 is perhaps 1 and here s of 2 is perhaps
2 and so3 looks like it's 4 and a half and as
2/4 is maybe 5 and s 2/5 is maybe 5 and a half
okay so for every natural number n we have a
possibly rational or possibly real number value
according to the modern mathematicians s of n
and that's indicated by these points here that
our graph actually just want to let our graph
of this sequence s of n now what about this
number a where does that figure well that is
number which you can think of as being a place on
the vertical axis in this case one two three four
five looks like a is five and here's the value
five that green line represents the value five
and we're interested in the sequence approaching
five the limit of the sequence is this value a the
idea that as we keep going further and further
further along these values start getting closer
and closer to five in other words they start
getting closer and closer to the green line
right here they're bouncing around sometimes
close to the green line sometimes further away
but the idea is that as we keep going they
should start getting closer and closer to
the green line if the limit of the sequence is a
which is five okay so how do we capture that idea
so the idea is that for every epsilon greater
than zero and you should think of epsilon as
being a little displacement from a so epsilon
in this case is actually one what I pictured
so we imagine a little interval centered at
a epsilon in this direction epsilon in this
direction and that interval is then registered
by these red lines all right so the numbers that
are within epsilon of a or whose Y component is
within epsilon of a are the numbers in this red
band around the green line so the condition
here says that for every epsilon greater than
zero so for example for epsilon equals one there
should be some position or some natural number
capital n such that if the little n is bigger
than capital n in other words if we're to the
right of this fixed position then the difference
between s and a is always less than Epsilon in
other words from this position on the sequence
is always in the red band around the value a
and this example we can kind of see that partially
happening the sequence is sometimes in and
sometimes out of the red band up to this value
of n which I suppose is equal to ten and then
from then on it looks like it might be true the
case that all the sequences values from then on
are in the red band even if we go very very far in
that direction they're always within one of five
all right so given epsilon which is one there's
a natural number n so that if we look at little
n past that point then the difference between s
of N and a is always less than Epsilon now this
condition has to be satisfied not just for epsilon
equals 1 which is what I've shown you here but it
has to be satisfied for every epsilon so epsilon
equal to 1/2 for example if epsilon was equal to
a half then we have to change this picture by
moving these red lines closer to the green line
so we would compress the interval around a so
just a 1/2 on either side so imagine this sort
of smaller band or tighter band then we would
require that there's some new number capital n
so that if we're past that new number that from
then on all the elements in the sequence would
be in this smaller band with separation 1/2
from a on both sides for all elements in the
sequence past this other n so the requirement is
let's summarize that the limit of the sequence
s of n is equal to a as n approaches infinity
if for every epsilon greater than zero for no
matter what small interval we take there is some
position capital n so that beyond that position
so when n is bigger than that fixed position
then we guarantee that the difference between
the sequences values and the limiting value less
than Epsilon it's a major definition it's not so
easy to understand it's also not entirely so easy
to work with practically either there's a slight
departure that I've introduced when I writing it
this way I've written it with brackets here these
brackets are not usual without the brackets
it seems to me there is a real possibility of
confusion as to what the logical structure of
this right-hand side is it's very easy then to
get confused and think well this implication might
refer to if all of this is true then this is true
but it's not like that is for every epsilon
greater than zero there is a natural number
such that this whole condition is satisfied all
right so why is this problematic it's problematic
for a number of reasons which are what first
of all we have not defined what a sequence is
so the very objects that we're investigating
here have not been properly defined that is in
fact a very serious problem the second is that
in the modern treatments of things the numbers
that are involved the epsilon the a the sequence
values are allowed to be so-called real numbers
and as I've mentioned many times up till now
real numbers are an optical illusion they do
not really exist so the whole setup with real
numbers is a distortion of what it really ought
to be and it's ironic too that although the this
definition of limit assumes you already know what
real numbers are in fact when you go to a lot of
places and find out well what actually is a real
number you find that real numbers are defined
in terms of limits so somehow there often is
a kind of circularity floating around underneath
the carpet if you bother to look there's another
issue we haven't talked too much about absolute
values the absolute values are alright but they're
just a little bit problematic but it's not too
serious but there's something more fundamentally
problematic about this definition which is which
is what so the nature of the right-hand side is in
some sense open-ended in other words it does not
make very clear what actually is required to prove
that the limit of s of n equals a ok there's this
condition that for every epsilon greater than zero
there's a natural number n satisfying a certain
condition but what do we actually have to check
are we obliged to go through all the possible
Epsilon and for every possible epsilon compute
an n so I've shown you you know for this sequence
and maybe if epsilon is one then maybe n is equal
to ten and maybe if epsilon is a half we can work
out that n has to be 20 and maybe if epsilon is
one-tenth maybe n has to be a hundred and if
n is one millionth then maybe n has to be ten
trillion so we can keep going choosing different
epsilon for each epsilon we can work out an end
but this condition requires us to simultaneously
do that for all epsilon and what does that mean
how does one check this condition for all epsilon
well if you're a novice to this you you probably
don't know what to do but if you've seen some
examples then what you will see is that what's
usually done in this situation is to find a
general argument to find a general formula
that allows you to go from a general epsilon
to a general formula for n in terms of Epsilon
so what's really required to verify
this is not a number or a bunch of
numbers or anything too specific it's actually a
formula a formula that tells us how to go from
epsilon to N so if you're writing a computer
program to try to check whether someone's
solution or proof of a limit actually worked
you have very hard time because it's not so
easy to to check whether a given formulation
of this relation between epsilon and N is a
valid one so logically speaking there is I
think a very subtle ambiguity as to what exactly
the definition really requires it's a difficult
definition students struggle with it and mostly
in most calculus courses this is slid under the
carpet this limiting definition and people are
just told well believe us there is a definition
that officially works but you don't have to
really worry about it unless you're becoming
a professional mathematician that's clearly not
a very adequate state of affairs so let me just
record some of my concerns with the definition
of a limit the term sequence first of all is not
defined that's a clear problem the usual usage
assumes that these objects are so-called real
numbers and real numbers are never properly
defined there is a fix for this problem the
fix is just to use rational numbers and that
can be done so this is not insurmountable
another issue is how does one verify that for
every epsilon greater than 0 there is an N in
natural numbers etc what does this actually mean
what is actually being asked here specifically
for example do we need to actually prove this
association between epsilon and N or do we just
need to somehow state it and there's an issue
about absolute values so again here this little
table is illustrating the the conundrum
associated to these points that for every
epsilon there supposed to be an N epsilon equals
1 maybe n is 10 epsilon is a half maybe n is 37
epsilon equals 5 then maybe n only has to equal
1 but are we obliged to fill out this table it's
clearly impossible for us to fill out the table
for all values of epsilon so what exactly is the
definition requiring it's requiring some kind
of abstract statement or proof but the nature
of that proof or theorem is not very clearly
enunciated I think in the in the definition
and then there's the issue of whether the absolute
values are really needed that's a little bit more
important when we go to higher dimensions that
that issue rears its head in higher dimensions
a little bit more than it does here all right
so I would like to propose an alternate way of
thinking about what a limit is and my approach
is to start simple so we're going to work in the
context of rational poly number on sequences and
what that means is rational poly number is just
our name for what's usually called a rational
function and a non sequence is just our word
for a sequence that keeps on going an infinite
sequence on the speak so we're only going to
be looking at those sequences which are given
by rational functions or rational poly numbers
so it's a relatively restricted class but so far
those are the only ones that we've been able to
define in a very consistent and completely clear
way so we're going to stick with those for now so
for example here's an example of a rational poly
number or usually call it a rational function so
4 plus 2 alpha plus 3 alpha squared that's
a integral poly number and here's another
integral poly number 1 minus 3 alpha plus alpha
cubed in the denominator and this formal ratio
is a rational poly number and associated to it
is an infinite sequence or on sequence meaning
just a sequence that keeps on going this is how
we write the sequence by replacing the alpha with
an n little n is our favorite letter for talking
about sequences we can generate actual values for
the sequence by successively replacing n with
one and then with two and then with three and
so on as far as we have patience with that's
the Associated on sequence so our aim now is
to define what we mean when we say that the limit
as n approaches infinity of P of N equals a so a
here is a number for us which is a rational number
P is a rational poly number like this one here and
we want to know what does this mean for us what
does it mean when we claim that this on sequence
is heading towards some particular value how do
we express that idea concretely and precisely
well whatever our definition is it had better have
the following properties it had better be the case
that if we take the limit of the constant sequence
say the constant sequence to that the limit as n
approaches infinity of the this sequence too is
itself two reflecting the obvious fact that the
sequence tu-tu-tu-tu-tu-tu and so on that its
limit is to another very important thing that
we're going to need is that the basic sequence 1
over n sequence 1 1/2 1/3 1/4 and so on its limit
had better be 0 that's our fundamental example of
a sequence which is converging to 0 so if that's
not converging to 0 then nothing else is and
here's a site variant when we take one over N
squared so the sequence 1 over 1 1 over 4 1 over
9 1 over 16 this is also converging to 0 so it's
limit should also be 0 in fact if we replace the
N squared here with n cubed well then we also get
another sequence that converges to 0 and finally
the sequence n the limit as n approaches infinity
of n namely this sequence here the sequence of
natural numbers themselves 1 2 3 4 then its limit
if it exists at all had better be infinity so if
we want to talk about the limit of this sequence
we're probably going to have to introduce some
kind of extension of the rational numbers like
the extended rational numbers we've been talking
about and in that case it might be perfectly
reasonable for us to say yes the limit of this
sequence is infinity so these are some guiding
examples that we certainly want to have true if
we're going to define this notional limit okay
so here's our definition if P of n is a rational
poly number on sequence so P is a rational pilot
number and this is the the sequence associated to
it and a is a rational number then the limit as n
approaches infinity of P of N equals a precisely
when the following so this is the condition that
encapsulate this limit so what is the condition
the condition is that we can find K and M natural
numbers so that if n is bigger than or equal
to M then the difference between P of N and a
is sandwiched between K over N and minus K over
N so the limit as n approaches infinity of P of
N equals a precisely when we can find K and M so
that this condition is satisfied whenever n is
bigger than M what's the meaning the meaning is
that the difference between P of N and a should
be getting small as n gets big and it's getting
small in a way that's sandwiched between K over N
and minus K over N this is a small positive number
this is the small negative number the negative of
that one this difference here has to be sandwiched
between the small positive number and the small
negative number so it's getting close to zero
that's what this is telling us and the bigger end
gets the closer these two things are to them to
each other the tighter the sandwich between this
thing in this thing meaning this thing here has to
get closer and closer to zero because it's between
some number and it's negative what is KK is just
a scale that allows us to have some flexibility
to fit the difference between these things two
to the N so there's two these two numbers are
important m and K in this definition I'm going to
give them some names so we're going to say that M
is the start and K is the scale so these will also
refer to them as certificates for the limit so the
idea is that if you want to prove that a certain
sequence has a certain limit what you're obliged
to by this definition is to find two things you
have to find a natural number K called the scale
and a natural number M call the start so you have
to exhibit K you have to exhibit m and they're
natural numbers like seven or twenty three or
three thousand four hundred and ninety two you
have to show us what K is show us what M is and
K and M have to have this property that whatever
n is bigger than the M you've chosen the start
then this inequality is satisfied sandwiches the
difference between P of N and a between K or and
and this negative this is very different from the
classical definition in the classical definition
we're asked to start with an epsilon and find a
capital n so that some condition is satisfied
here it's somewhat different we're asked to
find two numbers K and M and we present you with
the two numbers K M which make this sandwich in
work so we can think of these Ches and M's as
somehow certificates for the limit there they
are documents that guarantee that the limit works
so that you can verify that the limit actually
works for the certificates that have been chosen
so let's see how it works in practice always the
litmus test let's start with the simplest example
a constant sequence say the constant sequence 2 is
the limit as n approaches infinity of 2 equal to
2 we have to check the definition so here's this
constant rational poly number that we're thinking
about P equals 2 and what we need to do is we
need to find a natural number M call the start and
another natural number K call the scale so that if
n happens to be bigger than M bigger than or equal
to M then the difference between the sequence and
its limit is between K over N and minus K or
an but wait a minute the difference between the
sequence and its limit is always 0 and 0 is always
between this positive number and it's negative no
matter what K and n are as long as they're natural
numbers so this holds for any K and n natural
numbers that means there's no obligation on us to
chew particular M or K it means we can choose any
m and any K that we want and we prefer to choose a
smaller M so let's choose M equals 1 and smaller K
k equals 1 and then if n is bigger than or equal
to M which is 1 then indeed this difference 0 is
between 1 over N and minus 1 R and the K being 1
so note that the M and the K were not unique in
fact in this case any M and K natural numbers
would work this is a very simple example and
let's look at the second example the limit of the
sequence 1 over N as n goes to infinity we want
to show that that's equal to 0 so we have to check
the conditions for the limit so our rational paly
number is the 1 over alpha and what we need to do
is to find a number M called the start and number
K call the scale both natural numbers so that what
so that if n is bigger than or equal to M then the
difference between the sequence and the limit will
be sandwiched between K over N and minus K over N
so we want to find m and K so that this inequality
holds for all and bigger than M bigger than or
equal to M so we look at this inequality what is
it actually saying well the 1 over N minus 0 is
that's just 1 over N but we can see that that's
going to be about inequality if we just choose K
to be equal to 1 so if we choose k equal to 1 then
we can choose m equals to 1 because it's going to
be hold for all n so if n is bigger than or equal
to 1 or M then minus 1 over N is less than or
equal to 1 or n is less than or equal to 1 over
n this is a true inequality it's the inequality
that we want to have satisfied if K is equal to
1 so we found the M we found the K they're both
equal to 1 those are certificates that we can
breathe that demonstrate to us that we have
satisfied the crucial inequality we have bounded
the difference between the sequence and its limit
between a multiple of 1 over N and the negative of
that multiple of 1 over N okay these are all still
baby cases so probably you'd like to have some
challenges and try some slightly harder examples
so here's an exercise for you to show that the
limit as n approaches infinity of 1 over n plus 1
is also 0 the limit as n approaches infinity of 1
over N squared is 0 and a little bit trickier the
limit as n approaches infinity of 1 plus n over 2
plus n is 1 alright so great little exercises for
you to practice your logical skills maybe also a
little bit of manipulation with inequalities we
haven't said very much about inequalities but to
carry on with a discussion of limits we need to
say a little bit more about inequalities to remind
you of how to manipulate them a little bit so next
time we're going to have a look at that so we look
at some more examples of limits in this somewhat
new and better way and we're going to apply
inequalities to be able to tackle slightly more
sophisticated limits so I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening